---
permalink: /teaching/2020/11/teaching1/
title: "The first teaching post"
layout: "posts"
author_profile: true
---

This is my first teaching post

1. **Title**: The title has to be very clear and concise. It declare the subject matter and the geographical area concerned. 
The title can be borken down into main and subtitle. 

2. **Legend**: The legend must be carefully constructed as it provides the key of reading. It must include all the elements present on the map ! The elements must be hierarchical and carefully structured. The legend should not only explain the different informations present on the map, bu also include a title that corresponds to the name of the variable representted and eventually the discretization method used. 

3. **Scale**: The map must always be accompanied by a scale. It is necessary to evaluate the dimensions of the studied territory. We recommend to use a graphic scale, as it is always valid when reducing or enlarging the map. 

4. **Orientation**: By convention, the orientation to the north is upward. This orientation has to be specified, particularly when the territory is little known by the reader. 

5. **Author**: The author of the map is both the organization and the individual producing the map. It is therefore necessary to indicate it on the map. 

6. **Sources**: The sources are essential and must provide the reader with informations on any data processing carried out. It is also determinent to evaluate the relevance of the data shown. 

7. **Date**: There are two categories of dates in a map : (i) the date linked to the data (the collection of data), this date can be integrated to the title of the map. (ii) the date of the production of the map, usually indicated in brackets after the name of the author. 

8. **Frame/coordinates**: The presence of a thin frame that encompasses the entire map is ussually recommended. The frame should never be closer than 1cm from the sheet edge. Moreover, it is also recommended to ad the coordinate reference system associated with the projection used for the map, especially in a scientific communication where the results can be replicated. 

9. **Toponymie**: The map has to be labeled with some toponymis like cities or known places. 
